DOC-2620 & PCP-6507 - HyperShift + OpenShift support on MAAS (#10205)
spectrocloud/librarium: docs/docs-content/clusters/data-center/maas/create-manage-maas-openshift-clusters-hypershift/build-import-rhcos-image.md

---
sidebar_label: "Build and Import RHCOS Image"
title: "Build and Import MAAS-Compatible RHCOS Image"
description:
  "Learn how to build and import a MAAS-compatible RHCOS image for use with OpenShift workload clusters on MAAS."
hide_table_of_contents: false
tags: ["data center", "maas", "openshift", "hypershift"]
sidebar_position: 10
---

:::preview

:::

Red Hat Enterprise Linux CoreOS (RHCOS) is incompatible with the standard
MAAS/[Curtin](https://canonical.com/blog/customising-maas-installs) deployment process out of the box. MAAS deploys
machines using a two-stage boot process in which Curtin writes and validates the target OS disk image. Curtin expects a
traditional Linux root filesystem layout including:

- a `/curtin` directory.
- `cloud-init` as the machine configuration tool.

> - a standard filesystem structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
traditional Linux root filesystem layout, including:

- a `/curtin` directory
- `cloud-init` as the machine configuration tool
- a standard filesystem structure
```
I would avoid using periods, as these are not complete sentences.

None of these are provided natively by RHCOS. In addition, RHCOS uses
[Ignition](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_enterprise_linux/9/html/composing_installing_and_managing_rhel_for_edge_images/assembly_using-the-ignition-tool-for-the-rhel-for-edge-simplified-installer-images_composing-installing-managing-rhel-for-edge-images)
for machine configuration rather than cloud-init.

To work around this, the RHCOS MAAS image build process appends a minimal Ubuntu root filesystem as an extra partition
to the official RHCOS raw image. This allows Curtin validation to pass, while Curtin hooks persist the real Ignition
configuration for RHCOS, which is applied on first boot.

This guide walks you through building the MAAS-compatible RHCOS image and importing it into your MAAS environment. This
image is required before you can deploy OpenShift workload clusters on MAAS using HyperShift.

## Prerequisites

- A Linux build host with the following tools installed:

  - `debootstrap`
  - `rsync`
  - `losetup` (util-linux)
  - `sgdisk` (gdisk)
  - `kpartx`
  - `partprobe`
  - `udevadm`
  - `mkfs.ext4`
  - `e2label`
  - `gzip` / `gunzip`

>   - Root privileges (`sudo`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - root privileges (`sudo`)
```
I would not capitalize it, since it's not a full sentence.

- The MAAS CLI (`maas-cli`) installed on your build host.

- A MAAS server endpoint and API key. Refer to the

>   [MAAS API Keys](https://canonical.com/maas/docs/how-to-find-and-use-api-keys) documentation for guidance on obtaining

Reviewer: Sadly, the link returns 404

<img width="1652" height="877" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/eb681b04-1539-4f21-9ffa-7a89faebcade" />

Author: @svetlana-efimova There is an actual DDOS attack underway: https://www.reddit.com/r/Ubuntu/comments/1t0jfts/ubuntucanonical_services_reportedly_disrupted_by/

Their entire subdomain is down 😬

   7. Copies the Ubuntu root filesystem directory into p5.
   8. Copies the Curtin scripts into `/curtin`.
   9. Compresses the new raw image to `*-with-ubuntu.raw.gz`.

   The resulting partition layout is as follows:

   | Partition | Contents                                                |
   | --------- | ------------------------------------------------------- |
   | p3        | RHCOS boot                                              |
   | p4        | RHCOS root                                              |
   | p5        | Ubuntu fake root filesystem (Curtin validation + hooks) |

   </details>

   The original input image remains unchanged and the output image is saved alongside the original input image.

   ```text hideClipboard title="Example output image path"
   ./images/rhcos-4.20.13-x86_64-metal.x86_64-with-ubuntu.raw.gz
   ```

4. Set your MAAS credentials as environment variables. Replace `<https://your-maas-server/MAAS>` and `<maas-api-key>`
   with your MAAS server endpoint and API key, respectively.

   ```bash title="Set MAAS credentials"
   export MAAS_ENDPOINT="<https://your-maas-server/MAAS>"
   export MAAS_API_KEY="<maas-api-key>"
   ```

   :::warning

>    MAAS OAuth credentials are sensitive. Do not add credentials to the deploy scripts. Using environment variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   MAAS OAuth credentials are confidential. Do not add credentials to the deploy scripts. Using environment variables
```
Maybe?

>    MAAS OAuth credentials are sensitive. Do not add credentials to the deploy scripts. Using environment variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Keep your MAAS OAuth credentials secure. Do not add credentials to the deploy scripts. Using environment variables
```
Or like this?

   - Replace `<image-name>` with a descriptive name for the image as it will appear in the MAAS boot resources list.
   - Replace `<operating-system>` with the OS name to associate with the image in MAAS.
   - Replace `<release-version>` with the OS version to associate with the image in MAAS.

   ```bash title="Template"
   ./import-maas-image.sh \
     <maas-ready-rhcos-image-filepath> \
     <image-name> \
     <operating-system> \
     <release-version>
   ```

   ```bash hideClipboard title="Example"
   ./import-maas-image.sh \
     ./images/rhcos-4.20.13-x86_64-metal.x86_64-with-ubuntu.raw.gz \
     rhcos-4.20.13-with-ubuntu \
     openshift \
     4.20.13
   ```

   The script logs into MAAS using the `default` profile, uploads the image as a `ddgz` resource, and triggers a
   boot-resources import. The image will then appear in the MAAS boot resources list. Partition cleanup is handled
   automatically during deployment, no manual disk management is required.

## Validate

<Tabs groupId="validate-image">

<TabItem label="MAAS UI" value="maas-ui">

1. Log in to your MAAS server web interface.

2. From the left sidebar, navigate to **Images**.

> 3. Locate the image and verify it appears with the name you specified during import. The name will appear under the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Locate the image and verify it appears with the name you specified during import. The name appears under the
```

   **Release Title** column. For example, `rhcos-4.20.13-with-ubuntu`.

   The image may appear in the **Other** category if the image metadata does not match any existing categories.

4. Confirm the image status is **Synced**.

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="MAAS CLI" value="maas-cli">

Use the following command to list all boot resources and confirm your image is present. Replace `<image-name>` with the
name of the image you specified during import. For example, `rhcos-4.20.13-with-ubuntu`.

```bash
maas default boot-resources read | grep "<image-name>"
```

If the image was imported successfully, the command returns a JSON entry containing the image name. No output indicates
the image was not found.

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

## Next Steps

Now that the MAAS-compatible RHCOS image is imported, you can proceed to create the HyperShift host cluster that will
run the OpenShift control plane components.

> - [Create HyperShift Host Cluster](./create-hypershift-host-cluster.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that the MAAS-compatible RHCOS image is imported, you can proceed to [create the HyperShift host cluster](./create-hypershift-host-cluster.md) that will
run the OpenShift control plane components.
```
